draft-sullivan-tls-post-handshake-auth.md, before:

---
title: Post-Handshake Authentication in TLS
abbrev: TLS Post-Handshake Auth
docname: draft-sullivan-tls-post-handshake-auth-latest
date: 2016-07
category: std

ipr:
area: Security
workgroup: TLS
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -  ins: N. Sullivan
    name: Nick Sullivan
    organization: CloudFlare Inc.
    email: nick@cloudflare.com

 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

 -
    ins: M. Bishop
    name: Mike Bishop
    organization: Microsoft
    email: michael.bishop@microsoft.com

normative:
  RFC6066:
  RFC6961:
  RFC6962:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:

informative:



--- abstract

This document describes a mechanism for performing post-handshake certificate-based authentication in Transport Layer Security (TLS) versions 1.3 and later. This includes both spontaneous and elicited authentication of both client and server.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document defines a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session has been established. This allows both the client and server elicit proof of ownership of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed. It also allows for both the client and server to spontaneously provide a certificate and proof of ownership of the private key to the other party.

This mechanism is useful in the following situations:

This document defines a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session has been established. This allows both the client and server elicit proof of ownership of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed. It also allows for both the client and server to spontaneously provide a certificate and proof of ownership of the private key to the other party.

* This mechanism is useful in the following situations:
* servers that have the ability to serve requests from multiple domains over the same connection but do not have a certificate that is simultaneously authoritative over all of them
* servers that have resources that require client authentication to access and need to request client authentication after the connection has started
* clients that want to assert their identity to a server after a connection has been established
* clients that want a server to re-prove ownership of their private key during a connection
* clients that wish to ask a server to authenticate for a new domain not covered by the initial connection certificate 

This document intends to replace much of the functionality of renegotiation in previous versions of TLS. It has the advantages over renegotiation of only requiring one round trip and maintaining the same application keys during a connection.

This document describes four new post handshake authentication flows: client-triggered server authentication, spontaneous server authentication, server-triggered client authentication, and spontaneous client authentication. It also defines two new handshake extensions and several additional post-handshake messages, which mirror some of the messages in the TLS 1.3 handshake.

## Post-Handshake Authentication TLS Extension

We define a new TLS extension to advertise support for post-handshake authentication.

	enum { client_auth_elicited(0), client_auth_spontaneous(1), server_auth_elicited(2), server_auth_spontaneous(3), (255) } AuthTypes; 
	struct {
	  AuthType auth_types<0..2^8-1>;
	  select (Role) {
	    case server:
	      SignatureScheme supported_signature_algorithms<2..2^16-2>
	  }
	} PostHandshakeAuth;

Each AuthType value represents support for a given authentication flow.

client_auth_elicited
: indicates support for client authentication initiated by a server request

client_auth_spontaneous
: indicates support for client authentication initiated by the client

server_auth_elicited
: indicates support for server authentication initiated by a client request

server_auth_spontaneous
: indicates support for server authentication initiated by the server

The client includes a PostHandshakeAuth extension containing every type of authentication flow it supports in its ClientHello. The server replies with an EncryptedExtensions containing a PostHandshaekAuth extension containing a list of authentication types and the list of signature schemes supported. The set of AuthTypes in the server’s PosthandshakeAuth extension MUST be a subset of the set sent by the client. The extension may be omitted if the server does not support any form of post-handshake authentication.

## Post-Handshake Authentication Messages

The messages used for post-handshake authentication closely mirror those used to authenticate certificates in the standard TLS handshake.

### Certificate Request

For elicited post-handshake authentication, the first message is used to define the characteristics required in the elicited certificate.

opaque DistinguishedName<1..2^16-1>;

	struct {
	  opaque certificate_extension_oid<1..2^8-1>;
	  opaque certificate_extension_values<0..2^16-1>;
	} CertificateExtension;
	
	struct {
	  opaque certificate_request_context<0..2^8-1>;
	  select (Role) {
	    case server:
	      DistinguishedName certificate_authorities<0..2^16-1>;
	      CertificateExtension certificate_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
	    case client:
	      HostName host_name<1..2^16-1>;
	  }
	} CertificateRequest;

The certificate_request_context is an opaque string which identifies the certificate request and which will be echoed in the corresponding Certificate message.

For CertificateRequests sent from the server, the DistinguishedName and CertificateExtension fields are defined exactly as in the TLS 1.3 specification. For CertificateRequests send from the client, a HostName containing the Server Name Indication (defined in RFC 6066 [RFC6066]) used for selecting the certificate is included.

### Certificate Message

The certificate message is used to transport the certificate. It mirrors the Certificate message in the TLS with the addition of some certificate-specific extensions.

	opaque ASN1Cert<1..2^24-1>;
	
	struct {
	  opaque certificate_request_context<0..2^8-1>;
	  ASN1Cert certificate_list<0..2^24-1>;
	  Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
	} Certificate;

Valid extensions include OCSP Status extensions ([RFC6066] and [RFC6961]) and SignedCertificateTimestamps ([RFC6962]). Any extension presented in a Certificate message must only be presented if the associated ClientHello extension was presented in the initial handshake.

The certificate_request_context is an opaque string that identifies the certificate. If the certificate is used in response to a CertificateRequest, it must mirror the certificate_request_context sent in the CertificateRequest. If the Certificate message is part of an elicited authentication, the certificate_request_context is chosen uniquely by the sender.

### CertificateVerify Message

The CertificateVerify message used in this document is defined in section 4.3.2. of the TLS 1.3 specification.

	struct {
	  SignatureScheme algorithm;
	  opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
	} CertificateVerify;

The algorithm field specifies the signature algorithm used (see Section 4.2.2 of TLS 1.3). The signature is a digital signature using that algorithm that covers the hash output:

	Hash(Handshake Context + Certificate) + Hash(resumption_context)

The Handshake context and Base Key are defined in the following table

| Mode | Handshake Context | Base Key |
|------|-------------------|----------|
| Spontaneous Authentication | ClientHello ... ClientFinished | traffic_secret_N |
| Elicited Authentication | ClientHello ... ClientFinished + CertificateRequest | traffic_secret_N |

### Finished Message

Finished is a MAC over the value Hash(Handshake Context + Certificate + CertificateVerify) + Hash(resumption_context) using a MAC key derived from the base key.

## Post-Handshake Authentication Flows

There are four post-handshake authentication exchanges.

### Elicited Client Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a CertificateRequest message from the server to the client. It should only be sent if the server’s EncryptedExtensions contains a ClientAuth extension with an odd-valued certificate_request_context. Upon receiving a CertificateRequest message, the client may respond a contiguous sequence:

Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

or the sequence:

Certificate, Finished

where the Certificate message has an empty certificate_list field. The Certificate message must contain the same certificate_request_context as the CertificateRequest message. Non-empty Certificate messages should conform to the certificate_authorities and certificate_extensions sent in the CertificateRequest.

	<- CertificateRequest
	-> Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Because client authentication may require prompting the user, servers MUST be prepared for some delay, including receiving an arbitrary number of other messages between sending the CertificateRequest and receiving a response. In addition, clients which receive multiple CertificateRequests in close succession MAY respond to them in a different order than they were received (the certificate_request_context value allows the server to disambiguate the responses).

### Spontaneous Client Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a contiguous sequence of Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished message from the client to the server. The Certificate message should contain an even-valued certificate_request_context so as not to collide with an elicited client authentication. The Certificate message should conform to the certificate_authorities and certificate_extensions sent in the CertificateRequest and the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientAuth extension from the server’s EncryptedExtensions message.

	-> Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

### Elicited Server Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a CertificateRequest message from the client to the server. The CertificateRequest should contain an odd-valued certificate_request_context. Upon receiving a CertificateRequest message, the server may respond with either a certificate with a contiguous sequence of:

Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

or the sequence:

Certificate, Finished

where the Certificate message has an empty certificate_list field. The Certificate message must contain the same certificate_request_context as the CertificateRequest message. The Certificate message should conform to the ServerNameList sent in the CertificateRequest and the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientHello.

	-> CertificateRequest
	<- Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Clients MUST be prepared for some delay, including receiving an arbitrary number of other messages between sending the CertificateRequest and receiving a response. In addition, servers which receive multiple CertificateRequests in close succession MAY respond to them in a different order than they were received (the certificate_request_context value allows the server to disambiguate the responses).

### Spontaneous Server Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a contiguous sequence of Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished message from the server to the client. The Certificate message should contain an even-valued certificate_request_context so as not to collide with an elicited server authentication. The Certificate message should conform to the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientHello.

	<- Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Interaction between resumption

Certificate identity should not be maintained across resumption. If a connection is resumed, additional certificate identities for both client and server certificates should be forgotten.

# Acknowledgements {#ack}

Eric Rescorla and Andrei Popov contributed to this draft.

--- back

Commit message:

Address #3 and add certificate selection logic

draft-sullivan-tls-post-handshake-auth.md, after:

---
title: Post-Handshake Authentication in TLS
abbrev: TLS Post-Handshake Auth
docname: draft-sullivan-tls-post-handshake-auth-latest
date: 2016-07
category: std

ipr:
area: Security
workgroup: TLS
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -  ins: N. Sullivan
    name: Nick Sullivan
    organization: CloudFlare Inc.
    email: nick@cloudflare.com

 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

 -
    ins: M. Bishop
    name: Mike Bishop
    organization: Microsoft
    email: michael.bishop@microsoft.com

normative:
  RFC6066:
  RFC6961:
  RFC6962:
  I-D.ietf-tls-tls13:

informative:



--- abstract

This document describes a mechanism for performing post-handshake certificate-based authentication in Transport Layer Security (TLS) versions 1.3 and later. This includes both spontaneous and elicited authentication of both client and server.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document defines a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session has been established. This allows both the client and server elicit proof of ownership of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed. It also allows for both the client and server to spontaneously provide a certificate and proof of ownership of the private key to the other party.

This mechanism is useful in the following situations:

This document defines a way to authenticate one party of a Transport Layer Security (TLS) communication to another using a certificate after the session has been established. This allows both the client and server elicit proof of ownership of additional identities at any time after the handshake has completed. It also allows for both the client and server to spontaneously provide a certificate and proof of ownership of the private key to the other party.

* This mechanism is useful in the following situations:
* servers that have the ability to serve requests from multiple domains over the same connection but do not have a certificate that is simultaneously authoritative over all of them
* servers that have resources that require client authentication to access and need to request client authentication after the connection has started
* clients that want to assert their identity to a server after a connection has been established
* clients that want a server to re-prove ownership of their private key during a connection
* clients that wish to ask a server to authenticate for a new domain not covered by the initial connection certificate 

This document intends to replace much of the functionality of renegotiation in previous versions of TLS. It has the advantages over renegotiation of only requiring one round trip and maintaining the same application keys during a connection.

This document describes four new post handshake authentication flows: client-triggered server authentication, spontaneous server authentication, server-triggered client authentication, and spontaneous client authentication. It also defines two new handshake extensions and several additional post-handshake messages, which mirror some of the messages in the TLS 1.3 handshake.

## Post-Handshake Authentication TLS Extension

We define a new TLS extension to advertise support for post-handshake authentication.

	enum { client_auth_elicited(0), client_auth_spontaneous(1), server_auth_elicited(2), server_auth_spontaneous(3), (255) } AuthTypes; 
	struct {
	  AuthType auth_types<0..2^8-1>;
	  select (Role) {
	    case server:
	      SignatureScheme supported_signature_algorithms<2..2^16-2>
	  }
	} PostHandshakeAuth;

Each AuthType value represents support for a given authentication flow.

client_auth_elicited
: indicates support for client authentication initiated by a server request

client_auth_spontaneous
: indicates support for client authentication initiated by the client

server_auth_elicited
: indicates support for server authentication initiated by a client request

server_auth_spontaneous
: indicates support for server authentication initiated by the server

The client includes a PostHandshakeAuth extension containing every type of authentication flow it supports in its ClientHello. The server replies with an EncryptedExtensions containing a PostHandshaekAuth extension containing a list of authentication types and the list of signature schemes supported. The set of AuthTypes in the server’s PosthandshakeAuth extension MUST be a subset of the set sent by the client. The extension may be omitted if the server does not support any form of post-handshake authentication.

If a server supports either client_auth_elicited, or client_auth_spontaneous, it must also include a "signature_algorithms" extension (defined in TLS 1.3 section 4.2.2.) containing a list of supported signature schemes. This contains a list of the signature algorithms that the server is able to verify, listed in descending order of preference.

## Post-Handshake Authentication Messages

The messages used for post-handshake authentication closely mirror those used to authenticate certificates in the standard TLS handshake.

### Certificate Request

For elicited post-handshake authentication, the first message is used to define the characteristics required in the elicited certificate.

opaque DistinguishedName<1..2^16-1>;

	struct {
	  opaque certificate_extension_oid<1..2^8-1>;
	  opaque certificate_extension_values<0..2^16-1>;
	} CertificateExtension;
	
	struct {
	  opaque certificate_request_context<0..2^8-1>;
	  select (Role) {
	    case server:
	      DistinguishedName certificate_authorities<0..2^16-1>;
	      CertificateExtension certificate_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
	    case client:
	      HostName host_name<1..2^16-1>;
	  }
	} CertificateRequest;

The certificate_request_context is an opaque string which identifies the certificate request and which will be echoed in the corresponding Certificate message.

For CertificateRequests sent from the server, the DistinguishedName and CertificateExtension fields are defined exactly as in the TLS 1.3 specification. For CertificateRequests send from the client, a HostName containing the Server Name Indication (defined in RFC 6066 [RFC6066]) used for selecting the certificate is included.

### Certificate Message

The certificate message is used to transport the certificate. It mirrors the Certificate message in the TLS with the addition of some certificate-specific extensions.

	opaque ASN1Cert<1..2^24-1>;
	
	struct {
	  opaque certificate_request_context<0..2^8-1>;
	  ASN1Cert certificate_list<0..2^24-1>;
	  Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
	} Certificate;

certificate_request_context
: If this message is in response to a CertificateRequest, the
  value of certificate_request_context in that message.

certificate_list
: This is a sequence (chain) of certificates. The sender's
  certificate MUST come first in the list. Each following
  certificate SHOULD directly certify one preceding it. Because
  certificate validation requires that trust anchors be distributed
  independently, a certificate that specifies a
  trust anchor MAY be omitted from the chain, provided that
  supported peers are known to possess any omitted certificates.

Valid extensions include OCSP Status extensions ([RFC6066] and [RFC6961]) and SignedCertificateTimestamps ([RFC6962]). Any extension presented in a Certificate message must only be presented if the associated ClientHello extension was presented in the initial handshake.

The certificate_request_context is an opaque string that identifies the certificate. If the certificate is used in response to a CertificateRequest, it must mirror the certificate_request_context sent in the CertificateRequest. If the Certificate message is part of an elicited authentication, the certificate_request_context is chosen uniquely by the sender.

### CertificateVerify Message

The CertificateVerify message used in this document is defined in section 4.3.2. of the TLS 1.3 specification.

	struct {
	  SignatureScheme algorithm;
	  opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
	} CertificateVerify;

The algorithm field specifies the signature algorithm used (see Section 4.2.2 of TLS 1.3). The signature is a digital signature using that algorithm that covers the hash output:

	Hash(Handshake Context + Certificate) + Hash(resumption_context)

The Handshake context and Base Key are defined in the following table

| Mode | Handshake Context | Base Key |
|------|-------------------|----------|
| Spontaneous Authentication | ClientHello ... ClientFinished | traffic_secret_N |
| Elicited Authentication | ClientHello ... ClientFinished + CertificateRequest | traffic_secret_N |

### Finished Message

Finished is a MAC over the value Hash(Handshake Context + Certificate + CertificateVerify) + Hash(resumption_context) using a MAC key derived from the base key.

## Post-Handshake Authentication Flows

There are four post-handshake authentication exchanges.

### Elicited Client Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a CertificateRequest message from the server to the client. It should only be sent if the server’s EncryptedExtensions contains a ClientAuth extension with an odd-valued certificate_request_context. Upon receiving a CertificateRequest message, the client may respond a contiguous sequence:

Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

or the sequence:

Certificate, Finished

where the Certificate message has an empty certificate_list field. The Certificate message must contain the same certificate_request_context as the CertificateRequest message. Non-empty Certificate messages should conform to the certificate_authorities and certificate_extensions sent in the CertificateRequest.

	<- CertificateRequest
	-> Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Because client authentication may require prompting the user, servers MUST be prepared for some delay, including receiving an arbitrary number of other messages between sending the CertificateRequest and receiving a response. In addition, clients which receive multiple CertificateRequests in close succession MAY respond to them in a different order than they were received (the certificate_request_context value allows the server to disambiguate the responses).

Any certificates provided by the client MUST be signed using a signature algorithm found in the server's "signature_algorithms" extension. The end entity certificate MUST allow the key to be used for signing (i.e., the digitalSignature bit MUST be set if the Key Usage extension is present) with a signature scheme indicated in the server’s "signature_algorithms" extension.

### Spontaneous Client Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a contiguous sequence of Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished message from the client to the server. The Certificate message should contain an even-valued certificate_request_context so as not to collide with an elicited client authentication. The Certificate message should conform to the certificate_authorities and certificate_extensions sent in the CertificateRequest and the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientAuth extension from the server’s EncryptedExtensions message.

	-> Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Any certificates provided by the client MUST be signed using a signature algorithm found in the server's "signature_algorithms" extension. The end entity certificate MUST allow the key to be used for signing (i.e., the digitalSignature bit MUST be set if the Key Usage extension is present) with a signature scheme indicated in the server’s "signature_algorithms" extension.

### Elicited Server Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a CertificateRequest message from the client to the server. The CertificateRequest should contain an odd-valued certificate_request_context. Upon receiving a CertificateRequest message, the server may respond with either a certificate with a contiguous sequence of:

Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

or the sequence:

Certificate, Finished

where the Certificate message has an empty certificate_list field. The Certificate message must contain the same certificate_request_context as the CertificateRequest message. The Certificate message should conform to the ServerNameList sent in the CertificateRequest and the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientHello.

	-> CertificateRequest
	<- Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Clients MUST be prepared for some delay, including receiving an arbitrary number of other messages between sending the CertificateRequest and receiving a response. In addition, servers which receive multiple CertificateRequests in close succession MAY respond to them in a different order than they were received (the certificate_request_context value allows the server to disambiguate the responses).

### Spontaneous Server Authentication Flow

This flow is initiated by a contiguous sequence of Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished message from the server to the client. The Certificate message should contain an even-valued certificate_request_context so as not to collide with an elicited server authentication. The Certificate message should conform to the SignatureSchemes presented in the ClientHello.

	<- Certificate, CertificateVerify, Finished

Interaction between resumption

Certificate identity should not be maintained across resumption. If a connection is resumed, additional certificate identities for both client and server certificates should be forgotten.

# Acknowledgements {#ack}

Eric Rescorla and Andrei Popov contributed to this draft.

--- back
